
## readings:
- [ ] [NIST: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CROSSWALK](https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/Projects/risk-management/documents/Additional%20Resources/NIST%20RMF%20Roles%20and%20Responsibilities%20Crosswalk.pdf)
- [x] [LHL RMF Stage 1 - Categorizing Systems](https://web.compass.lighthouselabs.ca/p/cyber/days/w04d4/activities/2984)

# RMF Categorize | What is it?
### RMF Categorize Tasks (1,2,3)
There are _three tasks_ that needs to be completed in the __Categorize __stage: \
Three tasks in Categorize stage: Categorize, Describe and Register
1. Categorize: security categorization.
2. Describe: information system description 
3. Register: information system registration

__Categorize__ → Select → Implement → Assess → Authorize → Monitor \
##### what's the outcome of the Categorize stage?
- System characteristics documented
- Security categorization of the system and information completed
- __your categorization decisions__ \
attached to evaluation of assets, \
and reviewed/approved by authorizing official

# Task 1: Security Categorization

### Security Categorization SC
SC<sub>Information</sub> = {(C:val),(I:val),(A:val)} \
SC<sub>Information System</sub> =  {(C:val),(I:val),(A:val)}

> NIST SP 800-53 uses high-water mark
> 
> think of other policy/rmf and their water mark
```
SC<sub>__System__</sub> =  Max Value from both( SC<sub>Information</sub> __&__ 
SC<sub>Information System</sub> )
```
SC<sub>__System__</sub> =   {(C:__max__ val),(I:__max__ val),(A:__max__ val)}

SC<sub>__System__</sub> =  Max Value of ( {(C:max val),(I:max val),(A:max val)} ) = highest value over all. \
SC<sub>__System__</sub>  =  highest value over all. = SIL

RMF, systems are categorized by the impact resulting from failures of Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability. \
Note, confidentiality failures cannot be fixed after they have occurred. You could try to limit the damage or prevent recurrence.

### Classifying the Consequences of Security Breaches (NIST vs. ISO)
- NIST: for asset_CIA =(H, M, L), For Vulnerability, Impact/likelyhood matrix.
> NIST and ISO 27000 have the same objective but their methods differ. NIST uses a matrix that characterizes systems as a whole. Using NIST, it looks at the impact failures from the lens of the CIA. Here the impact is characterized as High, Moderate, or Low, resulting in a one-letter characterization (H, M, L).

- ISO: For Asset; Impact=chose(range 0-4), Likelyhood=chose(range 0-4), consequences of security breaches =  Impact + Likelyhood.
> ISO, on the other hand, uses a multi-tiered approach. It identifies assets and assigns values to assets on a scale of 0 to 4. It then identifies risks to assets (Impact versus Likelihood) on a scale of 0 to 4. It uses a matrix that adds value and risk numbers to produce a per-asset system score from 0 to 8. System score is the sum of all individual asset scores.


# Task 2: Information System Description

As an ISO in a Blue Team, your primary responsibility may be defining the system and documenting it in the security plan. \
Identifying a system is like placing an asset tag to a resource. \
It should contain the following at the minimum:

System identification:
- System name
- Unique identifier
- Version number
- Purpose

System description*:
- Architecture
- Major subsystems
- Information processed
- Hardware baseline: Computers, network devices, peripherals
- Software baseline: OSes, services, major applications
- Networks: media, protocols
- Environment

# Task 3: Information System Registration
All systems must be registered and documented. \
System registration facilitates management of assets and is used as a tracking tool.

### Security plan :world_map:
A security plan documents:
- Implementation of the risk management process :gear:
- and describes the system security posture. :mouse_trap:
Results of the security categorization are put in the security plan.

Add systems to the organization-wide system inventory (enterprise IT registry), as shown in the diagram below.

> Note, the system 'security categorization policy'.txt, is a doc. maintained by the organization to ensure asset descriptions are consistent across different assets. 
```
System definition.txt --→ Enterprise IT Registry.sql
  ↓
Security Plan.txt
  ↑ 
System security Categorization.txt
```
# Remarks
At a high level, \
the risk assessment and management steps are all about documenting your system’s characteristics. \
In order to perform a risk assessment, you need to: 
1. Identify your assets and vulnerabilities.
2. Characterize assets according to their potential impact if compromised.
3. Document the risks associated with each asset.

# tools :computer: :toolbox:
A risk management workflow is normally implemented in:
- Content Management System (CMS)
- such as Enterprise Mission Assurance Support System (eMASS)
- Telos XACTA

# Roles | Who is here? What do they do in Categorize RMF step ? :people_holding_hands:

There are multiple key roles in an enterprise that need to be involved in risk assessment and management, such as Chief Information Officer (CIO), Senior Information Security Officer (SISO), IT Manager, etc.

As a Blue Team member, you may have to work at the role of a :
- System Administrator
- System Owner
- System Security or Privacy Engineer
- System Security or Privacy Officer

You may go back [to the NIST reading](https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/Projects/risk-management/documents/Additional%20Resources/NIST%20RMF%20Roles%20and%20Responsibilities%20Crosswalk.pdf)and look at the duties and responsibilities of these roles more closely.


## ROLES  NIST -v ISO
|Hierarchy| NIST Role*|ISO Role**|
|-|-|-|
|0| Chief Executive Officer (CEO) | Senior Management |
|1| Chief Information Officer (CIO) | Chief Information Security (CISO)|
|1.a| Senior Information Security Officer (SISO) | Chief Information Security(CISO)|
|1.a.1| Security Control Assessor/Representative (SCA/SCAR) | Auditor| 
|1.b| Authorizing Official/Representative (AO/AOR) |-|
|2| Information System Owner (ISO) |Line Manager/Process Owner| 
|2.1| System/Program Manager (SM/PM) | IT Manager/System Developer|
|2.2| Information System Security Officer (ISSO) |Information Security Planning|
|2.2| Information System Security Officer (ISSO)|Information Security Committee |
|3|Information Owner (IO)| Information Asset Owner|
|-|-|Champion/Ambassador |


