GLossary
| Acronym | definition |
| - | - |
| OID | Object Identifier |
| MIB | Management Information Base |
| SMI | Structure of Management Information |

## (SNMP) [Simple Network Management Protocol](https://www.paessler.com/it-explained/snmp)
It is a protocol for management information transfer in networks,
for use in LANs especially, depending on the chosen version.

The Simple Network Management Protocol is part of the Internet Protocol Suite as an application layer (layer 7) protocol of the OSI model. SNMP uses the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) to transfer messages.

SNMP agents receive UDP requests on port 161. Requests sent from an SNMP manager may be sent from any port. Usually, it’s 161. Agents send traps via port 162. The SNMP manager also receives traps on port 162.

## Versions
Currently, there are three major versions of SNMP.

The first version was developed rather quickly in the late ´80s when network administration lacked suitable network administration tools that were not dependent on hardware manufacturers.

**SNMP v1** was defined in 1988 and was based on SGMP (RFC 1028).
> Then, it was broadly accepted and used. It is still used today, almost 30 years later, which is nearly an eternity in IT. SNMP v1 provides the basic functionalities for data polling and is relatively easy to use. It doesn't create much overhead because it doesn't include any encryption algorithms. So, for security reasons, use SNMP v1 in LANs only. Its biggest limitation is its 32-bit counter architecture, which is not enough for today’s gigabyte networks or larger.

If users want to manage networks in a WAN, the CMISE/CMIP protocol is the right protocol to go for.

**SNMP v2** supports 64-bit counters but still sends critical data as clear text, so it does not really enhance security.
> And if users come across SNMP v2, it is mostly "SNMP v2c" that manufacturers or networkers are talking about, with the "c" standing for "community". Two other SNMP v2 versions exist, SNMP v2p and SNMP v2u, but they are only implemented in rare cases.

**SNMP v3** (Defined in 2002), includes the advantages of SNMP v2c and adds security solutions like user accounts, authentication, and optional encryption of data packages This enhances security and makes SNMP v3 the recommended SNMP version when it comes to security. However, it also makes configuration more difficult, specifically user management. Therefore, much more processing power is needed, especially with short monitoring intervals that create a great number of SNMP messages.

SNMP v3 has three different security levels:
- NoAuthNoPriv 
> Stands for No Authentication, No Privacy. No authentication is required and messages are not encrypted. For obvious reasons, this should only be used in closed, secure networks.
- AuthNoPriv
> Stands for Authentication, No Privacy. Messages must be authenticated to be acted upon; however, they are not encrypted during transmission. Theoretically, a malicious actor could still intercept data that was sent between agent and manager during authorized transmissions but could not introduce additional Get or Set requests.
- AuthPriv
> Stands for Authentication and Privacy. This is the most secure implementation of SNMPv3. SNMP messages must be authenticated and all data is encrypted during transmission. This way, a malicious actor is prevented from sending their own Get or Set requests and from seeing the data generated by legitimate requests.
---
On a network, least one computer or server running monitoring software is the **managing entity**.
Anything else that needs to be monitored, are the **managed devices**.

SNMP messages are sent and received between so-called managers and agents. Usually, the SNMP manager in the network is installed on the managing entity and the SNMP agents are installed on the managed devices.

## SNMP message types
Types of SNMP messages for network monitoring via SNMP:

In SNMP terminology, a GET request from an SNMP manager (client) follows the pull model, whereas an SNMP trap is "pushed out" by an SNMP agent (server) without any previous request.

- **GetRequest**:
This is the **most common** SNMP message that an SNMP manager sends out to request data. The targeted device returns the requested value with a Response message.

1. **GetNextRequest**: Retrieves the next available data from a device starting at OID 0.
2. **GetBulkRequest**: Optimized in SNMPv2, retrieves multiple data sets in one request.
3. **SetRequest**: Changes a parameter's value on an SNMP agent, used for configuration updates.
4. **Response**: Sent by an agent in reply to a GetRequest or SetRequest, confirming actions.
5. **Trap(v2)**: Unsolicited message from agent to manager, triggered by specific conditions.
6. **InformRequest**: Introduced in SNMPv2, confirms receipt of trap messages from agent.
7. **Report**: SNMPv3 message used to report errors and provide error indications to applications.

"You can compare OIDs to IP addresses and MIB files to DNS entries."
-- [Source](https://blog.paessler.com/snmp-monitoring-via-oids-mibs?_gl=1%2Aqnmire%2A_gcl_au%2AMTc2NDk3NzM1MC4xNzE5NTcxMTM0%2A_ga%2AMTkwNTg3MTcuMTcxOTU3MTEzNA..%2A_ga_JG3ST477CK%2AMTcyMDEyOTUxNy41LjEuMTcyMDEyOTU0MC4wLjAuMTczMzQ4MzkzOQ..)

OIDs uniquely identify managed objects that are defined in MIB files.

Here is a sample structure of an OID:
```
Iso(1).org(3).dod(6).internet(1).private(4).transition(868).products(2).chassis(4)
.card(1).slotCps(2)-cpsSlotSummary(1).cpsModuleTable(1).cpsModuleEntry(1)
.cpsModuleModel(3).3562.3
```
or just:
```
1.3.6.1.4.868.2.4.1.2.1.1.1.3.3562.3
```

